Add Plugin Extensions for filters and filter forms (#1496)
nautobot/nautobot: nautobot/docs/plugins/development.md

    - banner.py             # Banners
    - custom_validators.py  # Custom Validators
    - datasources.py        # Loading Data from a Git Repository
    - filter_extension.py   # Extending Filters

>     - filter_form.py        # Extending FilterForm

Author: will do

After installing and enabling your plugin, you should now be able to navigate to `Secrets > Secrets` and create a new Secret, at which point `"constant-value"` should now be available as a new secrets provider to use.

### Extending Filters

Plugins can extend the current FilterSet's and FilterForm's that are natively provided.

> The basic requirements (additional requirements for each are described below) to extend a filter set or a filter form are:
> * The file must be named `filter_extensions.py`
> * The variable `filter_extensions` must be declared in that file, and contain a list of `PluginFilterExtension` subclasses
> * The `model` attribute of each `PluginFilterExtension` subclass must be set to a valid model name

Reviewer: Incorrect rendering, needs whitespace:

```suggestion
The basic requirements (additional requirements for each are described below) to extend a filter set or a filter form are:

* The file must be named `filter_extensions.py`
* The variable `filter_extensions` must be declared in that file, and contain a list of `PluginFilterExtension` subclasses
* The `model` attribute of each `PluginFilterExtension` subclass must be set to a valid model name
```

> Nautobot already dynamically creates many filters for each field type which allows the extension of related fields. Specfically, there are additional `lookup_expr` that are created when there is neither a `lookup_expr` nor `method` parameter set (in this context, `method` is a filterset parameter, not a class method), with the specific expressions based on the type of `django-filter` field used such as `CHAR` vs `NUMERIC` as hinted in the variable definitions seen below. Additionally, Nautobot will add the negation of any fields, meaning not only will `icontains` be added but so will `not icontains` using the `ic` and `nic` keys respectively.

Reviewer: This paragraph is really dense and technical - it might be worth revising, though I don't have a specific suggestion for doing so.

```python
# nautobot/utilities/constants.py
FILTER_CHAR_BASED_LOOKUP_MAP = dict(
    n="exact",
    ic="icontains",
    nic="icontains",
    iew="iendswith",
    niew="iendswith",
    isw="istartswith",
    nisw="istartswith",
    ie="iexact",
    nie="iexact",
    re="regex",
    nre="regex",
    ire="iregex",
    nire="iregex",
)

FILTER_NUMERIC_BASED_LOOKUP_MAP = dict(n="exact", lte="lte", lt="lt", gte="gte", gt="gt")

FILTER_NEGATION_LOOKUP_MAP = dict(n="exact")

FILTER_TREENODE_NEGATION_LOOKUP_MAP = dict(n="in")
```

!!! tip
    For developers of plugins that define their own model filters, note that the above are dynamically added, as long as the class correctly inherits from `nautobot.utilities.filters.BaseFilterSet`.

However, that does not cover every possible use case, to list a few examples:

> * Usage of a custom "method", which would allow arbitrary filtering, this is how the "q" search logic is currently performed, but that opionion may or may not match your ideal use case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Usage of a custom "method", which would allow arbitrary filtering. (This is how the "q" search logic is currently performed).
```

* Creation of a filter on a field that does not currently have filtering support
* Convenience methods for highly nested fields

> * Allow usage of a custom lookup, that you create such as adding math functions like floor and ceiling as lookups

Reviewer: How is this different from the first item about using a custom `method`?

> * Allow usage of a custom lookup, that you create such as adding math functions like floor and ceiling as lookups

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

There are several conditions that must be met in order to extend a filter:

* The original FilterSet must follow the pattern: `f"{model.__name__}FilterSet"` e.g. `TenantFilterSet`

> * The `PluginFilterExtension.filterset_fields` attribute must be a valid dict, with each key being the filter name (which must start with the plugin's `name`, e.g. `example_plugin_description`, not merely `description`) and each value being a valid [django-filter](https://django-filter.readthedocs.io/en/main/) filter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `PluginFilterExtension.filterset_fields` attribute must be a valid dict, with each key being the filter name (which must start with the plugin's `name`, e.g. `"example_plugin_description"`, not merely `"description"`) and each value being a valid [django-filter](https://django-filter.readthedocs.io/en/main/) filter
```

Nautobot will dynamically generate the additional relevant lookup expressions of a plugin's defined custom FilterSet field, so no need to additionally register `example_plugin_description__ic`, etc.

Similar to FilterSet fields, Nautobot provides a default filter form for each model, however that does not cover every possible use case. To list a few examples of why one may want to extend a filter form:

* The base filter form does not include a custom filter defined by the plugin as described above
* The base filter form does not provide a specific lookup expression to a filterable field, such as allowing regex on name

There are several conditions that must be met in order to extend a filter:

* The original FilterForm must follow the pattern: `f"{model.__name__}FilterForm"`, e.g. `TenantFilterForm`
* The `filterform_fields` attribute must be a valid dictionary of Django form fields

> Note: A plugin does not have to define both `filterset_fields` and `filterform_fields`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
!!! note
    A plugin is not required to define both `filterset_fields` and `filterform_fields`.
```

            field_name="description", label="Description", method=suffix_search
        )  # Creation of new filter with custom method
        dtype = MultiValueCharFilter(
            field_name="sites__devices__device_type__slug", label="Device Type"
        )  # Creation of a nested filter
        return {
            "example_plugin_description": description,
            "example_plugin_dtype": dtype,
            "example_plugin_sdescrip": sdescrip,
        }

    def filter_form(self):
        description = forms.CharField(required=False, label="Description")  # Leveraging a custom filter
        dtype = forms.CharField(required=False, label="Device Type")  # Leveraging a custom and nested filter
        slug__ic = forms.CharField(required=False, label="Slug Contains")  # Leveraging an existing filter
        sdescrip = forms.CharField(
            required=False, label="Suffix Description"
        )  # Leveraging a custom method search filter
        return {
            "example_plugin_description": description,
            "example_plugin_dtype": dtype,
            "slug__ic": slug__ic,
            "example_plugin_sdescrip": sdescrip,
        }

> 

Reviewer 2: TODO: Update

After installing and enabling your plugin, you should now be able to navigate to `Secrets > Secrets` and create a new Secret, at which point `"constant-value"` should now be available as a new secrets provider to use.

### Extending Filters

> Plugins can extend the current FilterSet's and FilterForm's that are natively provided.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Plugins can extend any model-based `FilterSet` and `FilterForm` classes that are provided by the Nautobot core.
```

> The basic requirements (additional requirements for each are described below) to extend a filter set or a filter form are:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The basic requirements to extend a filter set or a filter form are:
```

Author: How does this sound?: 
The basic requirements that extend to both the extension filter set and a filter form are:

> The basic requirements (additional requirements for each are described below) to extend a filter set or a filter form are:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The basic requirements to extend a filter set or a filter form are:
```

* The file must be named `filter_extensions.py`
* The variable `filter_extensions` must be declared in that file, and contain a list of `PluginFilterExtension` subclasses

> * The `model` attribute of each `PluginFilterExtension` subclass must be set to a valid model name in the dotted format

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The `model` attribute of each `PluginFilterExtension` subclass must be set to a valid model name in the dotted pair format (`{app_label}.{model}`, e.g. `tenant.tenant` or `dcim.device`)
```

> Nautobot dynamically creates many additional filters based upon the defined filter type. Specifically, there are additional `lookup_expr` that are created when there is neither a `lookup_expr` nor `method` parameter set on the filter already. Nautobot will also add the negation of any fields, meaning not only will `icontains` be added but so will `not icontains` using the `ic` and `nic` keys respectively.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Nautobot dynamically creates many additional filters based upon the defined filter type. Specifically, there are additional lookup expressions (referred to in code as `lookup_expr`) that are created fore each filter, when there is neither a `lookup_expr` nor `method` parameter already set. These dynamically-added lookup expressions are added using a shorthand notation (e.g. `icontains` is `ic`). Nautobot will also add the negation of each, for example, so `icontains` will be added along with *not* `icontains` using the `ic` and `nic` expressions respectively.
```

> The additional lookup methods added can be found here in [nautobot/utilities/constants.py](https://github.com/nautobot/nautobot/blob/main/nautobot/utilities/constants.py), the mapping logic can be found in [nautobot/utilities/filters.py](https://github.com/nautobot/nautobot/blob/main/nautobot/utilities/filters.py).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The dynamically-added lookup expressions can be found in the source code at [nautobot/utilities/constants.py](https://github.com/nautobot/nautobot/blob/main/nautobot/utilities/constants.py) and the mapping logic can be found in [nautobot/utilities/filters.py](https://github.com/nautobot/nautobot/blob/main/nautobot/utilities/filters.py). Please see the documentation on [filtering](../../rest-api/filtering.md#lookup-expressions) for more information.
```

!!! tip

>     For developers of plugins that define their own model filters, note that the above are dynamically added, as long as the class correctly inherits from `nautobot.utilities.filters.BaseFilterSet`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    For developers of plugins that define their own model filters, note that the above are added dynamically, as long as the class inherits from `nautobot.utilities.filters.BaseFilterSet`.
```

> The dynamically-added lookup expressions can be found in the source code at [nautobot/utilities/constants.py](https://github.com/nautobot/nautobot/blob/main/nautobot/utilities/constants.py) and the mapping logic can be found in [nautobot/utilities/filters.py](https://github.com/nautobot/nautobot/blob/main/nautobot/utilities/filters.py). Please see the documentation on [filtering](../../rest-api/filtering.md#lookup-expressions) for more information.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The dynamically-added lookup expressions can be found in the source code at [nautobot/utilities/constants.py](https://github.com/nautobot/nautobot/blob/main/nautobot/utilities/constants.py) and the mapping logic can be found in [nautobot/utilities/filters.py](https://github.com/nautobot/nautobot/blob/main/nautobot/utilities/filters.py). Please see the documentation on [filtering](../../rest-api/filtering/#lookup-expressions) for more information.
```

However, that does not cover every possible use case, to list a few examples:

> * Usage of a custom "method", which would allow arbitrary filtering. (This is how the "q" search logic is currently performed).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Usage of a custom `method` argument on a filter that points to a `FilterSet` method, which would allow arbitrary filtering using custom logic. This is how the `q` field search logic is currently performed.
```

* Creation of a filter on a field that does not currently have filtering support
* Convenience methods for highly nested fields

There are several conditions that must be met in order to extend a filter:

* The original FilterSet must follow the pattern: `f"{model.__name__}FilterSet"` e.g. `TenantFilterSet`

> * The `PluginFilterExtension.filterset_fields` attribute must be a valid dict, with each key being the filter name (which must start with the plugin's `name`, e.g. `"example_plugin_description"`, not merely `"description"`) and each value being a valid [django-filter](https://django-filter.readthedocs.io/en/main/) filter

Author: ```suggestion
* The `PluginFilterExtension.filterset_fields` attribute must be a valid dict, with each key being the filter name (which must start with the plugin's `name` + `_`, e.g. `"example_plugin_description"`, not merely `"description"`) and each value being a valid [django-filter](https://django-filter.readthedocs.io/en/main/) filter
```

Nautobot will dynamically generate the additional relevant lookup expressions of a plugin's defined custom FilterSet field, so no need to additionally register `example_plugin_description__ic`, etc.

> Similar to FilterSet fields, Nautobot provides a default filter form for each model, however that does not cover every possible use case. To list a few examples of why one may want to extend a filter form:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Similar to `FilterSet` fields, Nautobot provides a default filter form for each model, however that does not cover every possible use case. To list a few examples of why one may want to extend a filter form:
```

* The base filter form does not include a custom filter defined by the plugin as described above
* The base filter form does not provide a specific lookup expression to a filterable field, such as allowing regex on name

There are several conditions that must be met in order to extend a filter:

> * The original FilterForm must follow the pattern: `f"{model.__name__}FilterForm"`, e.g. `TenantFilterForm`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The original `FilterForm` must follow the pattern: `f"{model.__name__}FilterForm"`, e.g. `TenantFilterForm`
```

from django import forms

from nautobot.extras.plugins import PluginFilterExtension
from nautobot.utilities.filters import MultiValueCharFilter

def suffix_search(queryset, name, value):
    return queryset.filter(description=f"{value[0]}.nautobot.com")

class TenantFilterExtension(PluginFilterExtension):
    model = "tenancy.tenant"

    filterset_fields = {
        "example_plugin_description": MultiValueCharFilter(field_name="description", label="Description"),
        "example_plugin_sdescrip": MultiValueCharFilter(
            field_name="description", label="Description", method=suffix_search
        ),
        "example_plugin_dtype": MultiValueCharFilter(
            field_name="sites__devices__device_type__slug", label="Device Type"
        ),
    }

    filterform_fields = {
        "example_plugin_description": forms.CharField(required=False, label="Description"),
        "example_plugin_dtype": forms.CharField(required=False, label="Device Type"),
        "slug__ic": forms.CharField(required=False, label="Slug Contains"),
        "example_plugin_sdescrip": forms.CharField(required=False, label="Suffix Description"),
    }

filter_extensions = [TenantFilterExtension]

> ```

Reviewer 3: I don't like seeing this code duplicated in the documentation. If we decide to update it, now it has to be maintained in two places. It would be ideal if we could include raw source instead since this is all built from file paths? The `example_plugin` is found outside of the `nautobot` source tree so it might not be feasible today, but I would like this to be considered for the future.

Author: Left as is until a pattern is defined.

!!! tip

>     The `method` parameter, if used, must be a callable (method/function). Note that because filters with a `method` do their filtering in Python code rather than at the database level, performance of `method` filters is generally much poorer than pure-database filters. The `method` parameter is not supported when using [dynamic groups](../additional-features/dynamic-groups.md).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    The `method` parameter, if used, must be a callable (method/function). Note that because filters with a `method` do their filtering in Python code rather than at the database level, performance of `method` filters is generally much poorer than pure-database filters. The `method` parameter is not supported when using [Dynamic Groups](../additional-features/dynamic-groups.md).
```

>     The `method` parameter, if used, must be a callable (method/function). Note that because filters with a `method` do their filtering in Python code rather than at the database level, performance of `method` filters is generally much poorer than pure-database filters. This may especially be an important factor if using [dynamic groups](../additional-features/dynamic-groups.md) and defining a group(s) based around one or more `method` filters.

Author: ```suggestion
    The `method` parameter, if used, must be a callable (method/function). Note that because filters with a `method` do their filtering in Python code rather than at the database level, performance of `method` filters is generally much poorer than pure-database filters. The `method` parameter is not supported when using [dynamic groups](../additional-features/dynamic-groups.md).
```

    nire="iregex",
)

FILTER_NUMERIC_BASED_LOOKUP_MAP = dict(n="exact", lte="lte", lt="lt", gte="gte", gt="gt")

FILTER_NEGATION_LOOKUP_MAP = dict(n="exact")

FILTER_TREENODE_NEGATION_LOOKUP_MAP = dict(n="in")
```

!!! tip
    For developers of plugins, this should be noted when creating your own filters that the above is dynmically added, as long as the class correctly inherits from `nautobot.utilities.filters.BaseFilterSet`.

However, that does not cover every possible use case, to list a few examples:

* Usage of a custom "method", which would allow arbitrary filtering, this is how the "q" search logic is currently performed, but that opionion may or may not match your ideal use case.
* Creation of a filter on a field that does not currently have filtering support
* Convenience methods for highly nested fields
* Allow usage of a custom lookup

There are several conditions that must be met in order to extend a filter:
* The original FilterSet must follow the pattern: `f"{model.__name__}FilterSet"` e.g. `TenantFilterSet`
* Every key that is defined, must start with the plugin `name`, as defined within the plugin, e.g. `example_plugin_description` not `description`

> * The filterset method must return a valid dict of key/value pairs, with the key being the name and the value being a valid `django-filters` filter

Author: I added a link to django-filter documentation, lmk if that works as a solution.

        dtype = MultiValueCharFilter(field_name="sites__devices__device_type__slug", label="Device Type") # Creation of a nested filter
        return  {"myplugin-description": description, "myplugin-dtype": dtype, "myplugin-sdescrip": sdescrip}

filter_extensions = [TenantFilterSetExtension]
```

!!! tip
    The `method` parameter must be a callable in this scenario

There are several conditions that must be met in order to extend a filter
* The original FilterSet must follow the pattern: `f"{cls._meta.model.__name__}FilterSet"`
* The class must be a subclass of `PluginFilterSetExtension`
* The file must be named `filter_extension.py`
* The variable filter_extensions must be declared in that file, and contain a list of `PluginFilterSetExtension` subclassed classes
* The model attribute must be defined on the class to a valid model
* Every key that is defined, must start with the base_url, as defined within the plugin, e.g. `myplugin-description` not `description`
* The filterset method must return a valid `django-filters` set of key value pairs, with the key being the name and the value being a valid filter

!!! tip

>     Nautobot will dynamically add filters if no `lookup_expr` or `method` keyword arguments are defined

Author: I have updated the docs a fair amount, let me know if that makes sense.
